Clarify reinit (#3063)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/equations.tex

The operator reinitializes \lstinline!x! with \lstinline!expr! at an event instant.
\lstinline!x! is a \lstinline!Real! variable (or an array of \lstinline!Real! variables) that must be selected as a state (resp., states), i.e.\ \lstinline!reinit! on \lstinline!x! implies \lstinline!stateSelect = StateSelect.always! on \lstinline!x!.
\lstinline!expr! needs to be type-compatible with \lstinline!x!.

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of the same variable in \lstinline!when! and \lstinline!elsewhen! one \emph{one} \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer: I guess you meant _of_, but maybe one could also reformulate a bit more?
```suggestion
\lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).
```

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer: I think the misunderstanding comes from `equation` referring to an entire `when`-equation; not one of the sub-equations contained in one of its clauses.  So the point is to not allow this:
```
when foo() then
  reinit(x, 0);
end when;
when bar() then
  reinit(x, 0);
end when;
```

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer: Hence, I think this could be a better clarification (also changing _statement_ to _equation_):
```suggestion
\lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one \lstinline!when!-equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-equation is allowed).
```

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer 2: > I think the misunderstanding comes from `equation` referring to an entire `when`-equation; not one of the sub-equations contained in one of its clauses.  So the point is to not allow this:

I thought the point was also to not allow this:
```
when foo() then
  reinit(x, 0);
  ...
  reinit(x,1);
end when;
```

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer 2: > Hence, I think this could be a better clarification (also changing _statement_ to _equation_):

Whatever formulation we end up with, can we please change "reinit can for the same variable"? I don't know where "for the same variable part" belongs in that sentence. Is it part of the subject or the verb? Then it should be either "reinit for the same variable can" or "reinit can be applied for the same variable". Also "the same" assumes we talked about this variable before. It should be "a". I can't even get to the technical meaning of this sentence because it takes so much effort to unravel its grammatical structure.

> \lstinline!reinit! can for the same variable (resp.\ array of variables) only be applied (either as an individual variable or as part of an array of variables) in one equation (having \lstinline!reinit! of a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of same \lstinline!when!-statement is allowed).

Reviewer: OK.  Reformulating:
```suggestion
For any given variable (possibly an array variable), \lstinline!reinit! can only be applied (either to an individual variable or to a part of an array variable) in one \lstinline!when!-equation (applying \lstinline!reinit! to a variable in several \lstinline!when!- or \lstinline!elsewhen!-clauses of the same \lstinline!when!-equation is allowed).
```

The equations of a \lstinline!when!-clause are active during initialization, if and only if they are explicitly enabled with \lstinline!initial()!, and only in one of the two forms \lstinline!when initial() then! or \lstinline!when {$\ldots$, initial(), $\ldots$} then! (and similarly for \lstinline!elsewhen! and algorithms see below).
In this case, the \lstinline!when!-clause equations remain active during the whole initialization phase.
In case of a \lstinline!reinit(x, expr)! being active during initialization (due to being inside \lstinline!when initial()!) this is interpreted as adding \lstinline!x = expr! (the \lstinline!reinit!-equation) as an initial equation.

> The \lstinline!reinit! handling applies both if directly inside \lstinline!when!-clause or inside an \lstinline!if!-equation in the \lstinline!when!-clause.

Reviewer: I think this part is too central to #3001 make this PR qualify as a fix at the moment.  Probably an example would be a better way to address the problem than to state something the sounds like a trivial statement.

Author: I added an example of reinit similar to the existing examples.

Reviewer: It looks like the example has a point that should be illustrated, but what it shows doesn't seem grounded in normative parts of the text.  For example, it seems to rely heavily on constant evaluation of `steadyState` which is forced by the unbalanced initial `if`-equation.

Are we perhaps missing an `if`-equation branch balancing rule for `reinit` inside `when`-clauses triggered by `initial()`?

Author: I now added that both in the normative part and as explanation in the example.

Reviewer: I like the new example that I think answers the questions in #3001.  Resolving.

The equations of a \lstinline!when!-clause are active during initialization, if and only if they are explicitly enabled with \lstinline!initial()!, and only in one of the two forms \lstinline!when initial() then! or \lstinline!when {$\ldots$, initial(), $\ldots$} then! (and similarly for \lstinline!elsewhen! and algorithms see below).
In this case, the \lstinline!when!-clause equations remain active during the whole initialization phase.
In case of a \lstinline!reinit(x, expr)! being active during initialization (due to being inside \lstinline!when initial()!) this is interpreted as adding \lstinline!x = expr! (the \lstinline!reinit!-equation) as an initial equation.
The \lstinline!reinit! handling applies both if directly inside \lstinline!when!-clause or inside an \lstinline!if!-equation in the \lstinline!when!-clause.

> If \lstinline!reinit(x, expr)! is inside an \lstinline!if!-equation in the \lstinline!when!-clause it is treated as and counted as the equation \lstinline!x = expr;! for the \lstinline!if!-equations according to \cref{if-equations}.

Reviewer: Maybe we could formulate this as a consequence of the previous sentence instead of something that looks like an independent statement?
```suggestion
In particular, a \lstinline!reinit(x, expr)! needs to be counted as the equation \lstinline!x = expr;! for the purpose of balancing of \lstinline!if!-equations inside \lstinline!when!-clauses that are active during initialization, see \cref{if-equations}.
```

\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

\begin{example}
Resettable continuous time controller initialized either in steady-state or by providing a \lstinline!start! value for state \lstinline!y!:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
  parameter Boolean steadyState = true;
  parameter Real y0 = 0 "start and reset value for y, if not steadyState";
  Real y;
equation
  der(y) = a*y + b*u;

>   when { initial(), reset } then
>     if not ( initial() and steadyState ) then

Reviewer: Personally, I like this airy style, but I'm afraid we should introduce it here and now:
```suggestion
  when {initial(), reset} then
    if not (initial() and steadyState) then
```

      reinit(y, y0);
    end if;
  end when;
initial equation
  if steadyState then
    der(y) = 0;
  end if;
\end{lstlisting}

> If \lstinline!not steadyState! this will add \lstinline!y=y0! during the initialization; if not the \lstinline!reinit! is ignored during initialization and the initial equation is used.

Reviewer: White-space suggestion that got lost in the review:
```suggestion
If \lstinline!not steadyState! this will add \lstinline!y = y0! during the initialization; if not the \lstinline!reinit! is ignored during initialization and the initial equation is used.
```

\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

\begin{example}

> Resettable continuous time controller initialized either in steady-state or by providing a \lstinline!start! value for state \lstinline!y!:

Reviewer: This looks like the exact same introductory sentence as used in an existing example.  If that's the case, the two should be diversified somehow.

Also, it looks like we should be consistent and the hyphenated form _continuous-time_ (in both examples):
```suggestion
Resettable continuous-time controller initialized either in steady-state or by providing a \lstinline!start! value for state \lstinline!y!:
```

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
  parameter Boolean steadyState = true;
  parameter Real y0 = 0 "start and reset value for y, if not steadyState";
  Real y;
equation
  der(y) = a * y + b * u;

>   when {initial(), reset} then

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to define 'reset'. Even in all State Machines examples it is usually defined or extended from somewhere where it is defined. Here without the context of State Machine it is not clear what it is supposed to be at all.

Author: Ok, I added a declaration of reset. I made it a non-connector input to avoid depending on MSL.
